# AssaultCube Tech Prototype #

## Purpose ##

Development of the computer game AssaultCube began in 2004 and was first released in 2006. It is based on the [Cube (1) Engine](http://cubeengine.com/). One of the current challenges is the fact that AssaultCube can no longer live up to the expectations of todays players in terms of visual appearance. It may not be possible to make AssaultCube look like a 2021 AAA game and compete with commercial games but it is realistic to catch up significantly.

It is safe to say that all the potential of the Cube Engine technology has been fully exploitet. It is not possible to make the game look better with this engine. The artists have done everything possible to use the available tools to the max and they achieved outstanding results considering the technological limits. 

The natural step forward is to renew the technology stack from the ground up and to provide new tools to the artists so that they can make existing content look much better plus can
produce fresh, modern content for the game.

The Cube Engine has meanwhile been succeeded by [Cube 2: Sauerbraten Engine](http://sauerbraten.org/) which in turn has been succeeded by [Tesseract Engine](http://tesseract.gg/). The basic assumption is that the artists and programmers in the community like the philosophy of the Cube engine(s) and want to move forward with that approach thus want to explore the capabilities of the Tesseract Engine.

The purpose of this tech prototype is to explore how the technology of AssaultCube could be renewed by using the Tesseract Engine ([Tesseract revision 2496 / 2021-05-07](
 https://websvn.tuxfamily.org/revision.php?repname=tesseract%2Fmain&path=%2F&rev=2496&peg=2496])).

## DISCLAIMER ##

*This prototype has been put together by a programmer and not by an artists and so the game assest (maps, models, textures) are not of sufficiently good quality to showcase the full potential of the engine. For example, textures are currently of poor quality because the normalmaps and specularmaps are cheaply autogenerated and because the textures are generally of low resolution. The final result will look much better once artists improve the assets.*

## Quick Tour ##

Follow the steps of this quick tour to get an impression of the technology.

- Start assaultcube.bat / assaultcube.sh
- Navigate to "Options" 
  - Click on "Resolution" and make sure the proper resolution is set
  - Click on "Display", tick "Fullscreen", set Anisotropic Filtering to 16x and FXAA to "ultra"
  - /Display and make sure you set the proper resolution and a high level of anti aliasing for proper gfx
- Navigate to "Map Browser" and click the map "ac_complex"
- Walk around and look at the red bricks (parallax mapping)
- Walk to the center square to see a few static player models 
- Press T and type /thirdperson 2 to see an animated player model in action
- Press T and type /addbot, then shoot the boot to see ragdoll physics in action

# Changes

This tech prototype contains the following changes compared to vanilla Tesseract:

- import command for AC maps 
- 1 map from AC v1
- 49 textures from AC v1 with cheaply generated normalmaps/specmaps
- 5 hudgun models from AC v1 - the sniper rifle has a cheaply generated normalmap/specmap and the other guns have none
- 1 skeleton-animated player model with ragdoll physics support (some say they look more like Seaman than terrorists)
- 3 test map models (static player models)
- 1 game mode (insta i.e. OSOK with crosshair)
- hudgun sway and hudgun position from AC v1
- movement speed, crouch speed, straferunning from AC v1 (not perfect yet)
- disabled colouring of player models
- a little bit of AC theming for the UI

# Assets Migration Path

## Map Migration

## Texture Migration

## Hudgunmodel Migration

## Playermodel Migration

## Mapmodel Migration

# Impact

## Hardware Support

AC v1 was marketed with the promise to run well on old computers. Most of the computers that were considered "old" back in 2004 do not exist anymore today. If we look at old computers by today's standards then Tessearct will support those when gfx settings are reduced. If the assets are too expensive computationally we may provide alternative assets for older computers. For example the default player model could have 10k polys while the alternate player model has 2k polys.
